[MUSIC PLAYING]
Hi.
I'm Lisa Garr, host of
"Gaiam Inspirations."
Do you feel that
food controls you?
Did you know that the
brain has the same chemical
reaction to sugary
and fatty foods
that it has to
cocaine or nicotine?
And this chemical
reaction happens
even before you eat the food if
you even just think about it.
So would you like to end
that battle with food?
Today's topic is
for anyone who wants
to end the food addictions
or the hunger cravings
once and for all.
Dr. Pam Peeke is joining me.
She's a physician, scientist,
Pew Foundation scholar
in nutrition and metabolism,
and nationally renowned
expert in integrative medicine.
Dr. Peeke is a "New York
Times" best-selling author,
whose latest book
"The Hunger Fix:
the Three-Stage
Detox and Recovery
Plan for Overeating
and Food Addiction,"
it reveals that food
addiction is real.
And it's a science-based
blueprint for detox
and lifelong recovery.
Welcome to the show.
Thank you so much
for being here.
Well, hello there, Lisa.
You shed a lot of light
on this for a lot of us.
How did you first begin
to realize that food
is actually an addiction?
Well, it's interesting.
It was my patients.
They would come
in, and they would
have drug vernacular to describe
what was happening to them.
Gee, I need a hit of this.
I can't get off the stuff.
Withdrawal is killing me.
And after a while, you know,
I talked to my colleagues.
And I said, are they
all sounding like this?
And they said a growing
number of people
are really using this
kind of vernacular.
Could there be something there?
Is there a relationship
between food and addiction?
That's what got me going.
So did you ever have an
issue yourself with food?
Have you ever had
experience with being food
as an addiction?
I've said those things.
I need that cup of coffee.
Or I would die for some
sugar or for some chocolate.
Yeah.
Lisa, please.
[LAUGHTER]
OK, this is America.
All right?
If you didn't have some
kind of issue with food,
you'd be un-American.
[LAUGHTER]
So of course I've had it.
And this is another reason
why I can really relate to it.
I think all of us can.
When we sit down, close
our eyes, and say,
is there one particular
food product--
now, mind you I have
to say "food product"
because most of these
are science fair projects
or food-like products.
LISA: Mm--
So you know where
I'm going on that.
LISA: They're the most
addictive ones are those, right?
You know, close
your eyes and say,
is there one thing that I was
eating that, after I ate it,
I felt completely
out of control?
Then, you're on a bender.
And you just don't feel right.
And you're not even getting
the right satisfaction
from it anymore.
So there's something
wrong there.
So scientists began to
explore this entire arena.
So here are some
questions that you
can ask yourself to find out
if you have a food addiction.
So when life gets hard, is
it your first impulse to eat?
Do you stockpile "emergency"
snacks in your desk, closet,
or nightstand?
Do you-- do you have to know
where your next meal or food
source is going to be
at all times to feel--
or you feel nervous
or panicky or "off"?
In times of high
emotion, do you sometimes
find yourself
eating even when you
feel no physical hunger at all?
So emotional eating.
Does your relationship
with certain foods
cause you have feelings
of shame or guilt
or disgust or self-loathing?
Is food your best friend
or your worst enemy?
Actually, your best friend
and your worst enemy
at the same time.
How is that possible?
Oh, I mean, this is a rock and
a rolling kind of relationship
people have with food.
On the one hand, they
use it for comfort.
We already know that.
Actually, when you eat
these kinds of foods
that I'm talking
about, we actually
call them the
hyperpalatables, which
are the sugary, starchy,
fatty, salty combinations.
They actually, in the short
term, reduce stress hormone.
You basically go into kind of
a food numbness, an anesthetic.
But that wears off very quickly.
Then, you wake up out of it.
And you say, oh, my gosh,
what have I just done?
This is when you wake up in
bed, and you've got wrappers
and cartons all over the bed.
And you suddenly realize what
you've just done after you've
come out of your food coma.
Or you've bottomed out the
chip bag, and you realize--
DR. PEEKE: Oh, yeah.
How did I do that?
Or the other one is that
wonderful menage a trois people
have at night time,
especially women,
watching endless re-runs
of "Law and Order"
with your two best friends.
It's a menage a trois,
you, Ben, and Jerry in bed
together, all of you.
LISA: Yes.
Well, how long does
that last, though?
How long does the relaxation
part of the eating last?
Does it last for the whole
time you eat the food?
No, it's very interesting.
If you really feel
out of control
with these kinds of foods,
then you're eating with frenzy.
There's no real savoring
and really getting into it.
It's-- you're just going at
it with angst and frenzy.
So relaxation's really
not a piece of it.
What it is is numbing.
It's anesthetizing you.
So when you're stressed out
and you're feeling funky one
way or the other and
you've got these foods,
you know, flying
through your mouth,
then you just go from
angst to numb, basically.
So let's talk about some
of the science around this.
What does the
brain actually look
like on these food addictions?
-OK.
Well, for the longest
period of time,
scientists have really
wanted to explore
that one part of the
brain that we know
is already affected by
drugs, for instance,
and alcohol, so as it
were, validated addictions.
And that's the reward
center of the brain.
When you look at brain scans,
what you'll actually find
is if you look at a binge
eater, for instance, as compared
to someone who doesn't
binge, and you actually just
give them the simple cue
that a food is actually
coming or just the sight of it.
But they haven't
even eaten it yet.
What you're actually noticing is
the red there is the dopamine.
And that is the neurotransmitter
that is associated with reward
and pleasure in the brain.
The dopamine in
the control subject
is basically pretty normal.
They have a little bit
more dopamine coming up.
They're excited.
They see it.
But if you look at
the binge eater,
wow, the dopamine
just disappears as
soon as they've seen that food.
And that is because,
one, they've
been hyperconditioned to it.
And two, because they don't
even secrete that much.
They don't even have that
many dopamine receptors
to be able to pick it
up because over time,
that entire system changes.
So when someone
sees a commercial--
[SIGH]
When someone sees a
billboard, this reaction
happens in the brain.
DR. PEEKE: Absolutely.
It could even be looking
at someone who you usually
hang out with when you overeat.
It could be that subtle.
The cues are everywhere
in our environment.
It could be the chair
you're sitting in.
Maybe that's the chair
you always have binges in.
What if I think about it?
-That's all it is.
-You're kidding.
It's just a thought.
That's how powerful
these cues are.
The reward center
in the brain is
exquisitely sensitive to this.
And so dopamine gets secreted
immediately in response
to these kinds of
cues, especially
in people like binge eaters,
compulsive eaters, and people
who are addicted to food.
So the dopamine is the
feel-good element of the brain?
Is that what makes
us feel high or good?
Dopamine is a neurotransmitter.
It's a brain chemical that
is associated with anything
that has to do with reward.
It helps you with
motivation for reward.
You want to get
that college degree.
It gives you short term
gratification, long term.
It doesn't matter.
Anything that has to do with
reward, promoting reward
is all about dopamine.
Dopamine's in charge of that.
And then, the receptors
receive the dopamine.
So if there's a
cascade or a flood--
or you give the analogy
in the book, which I think
was brilliant, of a
flood going down a river.
DR. PEEKE: Mm-hm.
And it overcomes the river
and goes over the bank.
So it blows out, say, the
dopamine receptor for trees.
Right?
DR. PEEKE: That's right.
Well, so what ends up happening
in the brain of someone who
is at first-- let's just
say right off the bat,
you came from Amazon.
And now, you're gonna
come to America,
and you're gonna find sugary,
fatty, starchy, salty,
substances everywhere.
Right?
And so suddenly, these are
real hyperpalatable rewards.
Lots and lots of dopamine
starts being secreted.
So much so, over a period of
time-- not just once, but over
a period of time-- that
your receptors which
have to manage all
of this dopamine
basically become
absolutely overwhelmed.
The brain realizes it can't
process this amount of dopamine
coming in, that river.
It can't process it.
So instead, it takes
the actual receptors,
and it does something
we call downregulating.
What does it mean?
It means it turns
off and deactivates
most of these receptors.
So now, someone who
has an addiction,
whether it's alcohol, cocaine,
meth, or food-- right?
They have fewer receptors.
These are called D2 receptors.
-Ah.
We can actually
see this on scans.
So what this does
is the brain actually
turns against you then.
Right?
Well, what it
does is it doesn't
understand what's happening.
Everything in the brain is all
geared to one thing, Lisa--
survival.
And so if it sees
that you're getting
this huge rush all the time,
it tries to control this.
And it controls this
by downregulating
those dopamine receptors so
that you don't get overwhelmed.
What unfortunately happens
is you start a vicious cycle.
Because now, when I want to get
re-exposed to that particular
food stuff-- let's just say that
cupcake rolls around again--
then I eat the cupcake.
I even see the cue
for the cupcake.
But I'm not feeling
as much reward
because the dopamine receptors
are decreased in number.
And I'm not getting
as much reward.
So guess what happens?
You guessed it.
I have to have not
one, but five cupcakes
to get the same reward
I got originally.
LISA: Huh.
So this--
And it's-- well, this is the
same thing happens in drugs.
One moment, you have just one
hit of crack or, you know--
Mm.
Or heroine.
The next time, you're
just running at it.
So what the brain
looks-- this is
a-- we actually
have a slide here
of what the brain
looks like when it's
swelled with this dopamine.
Is this what it looks like?
DR. PEEKE: OK, well, so
this is a beautiful picture
of the brain.
And what we're looking
at here is how much
the brain enhances expectation.
So remember how I told
you about the cue.
All I have to say is, you
know, in about two hours, Lisa,
we're gonna have a cupcake.
Or and if that turns out
to be something that's
one of your binge-able,
cravable, what
I love to call "false fixes."
All right?
So what ends up
happening is you suddenly
realize that where that
orange is just lit up,
turned on, that you have
dopamine flooding in,
enhancing expectation.
And then, the
question by scientists
in this one
particular experiment
was how long does
that expectation last?
How long can you
keep that dopamine
enhancing that feeling?
Guess what?
80% of the subjects
in the experiment
kept it going for 24 hours.
-After they--
-It just keeps going and going--
-Oh, my goodness.
--and going.
So this isn't one of those, oh,
wow, what a wonderful thought.
And then, it just, you
know, flittered off--
-Right.
- --and ended.
No.
This can keep-- this
is why people obsess.
This explains the
epidemic that we have
in this country of obesity.
Yes, this explains the
trouble that we're in.
Because it is a
chemical reaction.
But most people wouldn't
think of food as a drug.
Well, now, you see, I'll betcha
people watching this interview
would say, I'm not an addict.
You know?
[LAUGHTER]
And you have all these terrible
thoughts about, you know,
addicts in, you know, the
end of allies or something.
And yet, at the same
time, how many of you
have fished through
a garbage can,
you know, to find
that cupcake again.
No, but seriously, as it
turns out, in all seriousness,
at the National
Institutes of Health all
throughout the world, we've
been looking at the science
of food and addiction.
And we finally hit
a tipping point.
We realized that through all
of the new tools that we have,
the PET scans, the functional
MRIs, and all of these lovely
scans that you've been
seeing, that we now understand
that there is a very
striking relationship
between food and addiction.
And for that matter,
the same centers
of the brain that regulate drug
addiction also regulate food.
Now, that's what's shocking.
And food is
available everywhere.
DR. PEEKE: Well--
You know, drugs are illegal.
But the food is everywhere.
So it makes it more
tempting and more
up to us to use will power.
DR. PEEKE: Well, you see,
here's another issue.
And we'll be getting into this.
But in your brain,
there's a battle going on.
You've got the reward
system that's been hijacked
by these hyperpalatables.
Because come on.
I mean, let's just get
real here for a minute.
You got a bowl of berries,
fresh berries, whole foods.
And then, you've got
this huge, steaming,
wonderful, warm, strawberry
tart with a cream
center and all the gooey--
[LAUGHTER]
Give me a break.
Who do you think--
I mean, come on.
Let's get real
here for a minute.
Uh-huh.
So I mean, don't think for
a second the food industry
hasn't figured this out either.
-Right.
Right.
-So there it is.
And then you say,
well, gosh, is everyone
affected by food addiction?
I would say not everyone.
I would probably say
the majority of people.
And there's a wide
spectrum of, you know,
people who have a
mild food addiction
to people who have very striking
and serious food addiction.
And these people also tend to
be cross-addicted, many of them,
meaning they have
other addictions
both genetically and
otherwise, like alcohol,
cigarettes, drugs.
LISA: Interesting.
So there's-- it's not
just the food addiction.
It goes generationally,
which is also--
Well, you've got--
all of a sudden,
you've got this cross-linking
between all of these addictions
that just sort of increases
the intensity of all addictions
by an order of magnitude
over people who just
simply have food addiction.
LISA: So we have
a slide about that
that shows the cross-linking
that you're talking about.
DR. PEEKE: Well, actually,
you know, what this one
is is very interesting.
This is a slide that shows the
brain, one of those centers
of the brain in
the reward center
that also is highly
associated with overeating.
So we decided to look
at an animal experiment
to see whether or not there
was any cross-linking between
overeating and cocaine abuse.
And as it turns out, it's
either one or the other.
You can't have both
at the same time.
When you stimulate
for food, what
you see is a decrease in
interest in both cocaine
as well as what we call
"novelty behavior,"
meaning that you want-- you're
exploring your environment.
You're taking risks.
So taking risk and
cocaine go together.
When those are stimulated, food
and appetite are decreased.
It's either one or the other.
But they're happening at the
same center in the brain,
which we never knew.
So the brain is either seeking
food or it's taking risk.
But it's not seeking the food
and the risk at the same time.
That's right.
And the risk is most highly
associated with drugs and drug
addiction, not with food.
Could you say that
the brain could
be interested in goal
setting or pleasure--
other types of pleasures and
not be interested in food
at the same time?
So if you say you want to go
out and play with your child.
DR. PEEKE: Of course.
Does that decrease
your desire for food?
DR. PEEKE: Oh, no, no no.
See what happens here is
you're-- you know, that
question is excellent, Lisa.
Because when you're
playing with your daughter
and you're having so much fun,
the last thing on your mind
is--
LISA: Right.
--hey, man, I need
to score a candy bar.
LISA: Exactly.
-It just doesn't happen.
Because now, you-- actually,
it's the reason why I called it
"The Hunger Fix."
What do you really hunger for?
-Mm.
And what you want is
a rich, wonderful life,
like enjoying your daughter.
Yes.
Instead of the false
hungers of the food
addictions which
drag you from that.
Because what we found, in both
animal experiments and human,
when you're in full
on, blowout addiction,
you don't care
about your family.
You don't care about
your obligations
and responsibilities.
You don't care about your work.
You don't care about self-care.
LISA: Mm.
You let it all
go for one thing.
And that is the foraging to
be able to find that food.
For that matter, in
animal experiments,
if we electrified the floor and
we had the hyperpalatable food
that they got conditioned
to on the other side
of that electrified floor,
these animals don't care.
They'll come right
across, get injured--
LISA: Oh.
--in the seeking for this
because they want it that much.
And boy, I'll tell you there's
some people watching this right
now who could raise their
hand and say, been there, done
that, probably
doing it right now.
LISA: I would--
yes, yes, exactly.
Get electrified for food.
It's interesting, though,
because when you exercise
or when you work out, you
always say, oh, I'm not hungry.
You know it's-- you don't
feel hungry if you're finding
something that excites you or
is interesting to you, even
if it's exercising or playing.
Let me ask you about
putting up, say, pictures
of how you want to look.
Or I noticed you have an awesome
picture of you as a triathlete,
just stunning, you
know, in your glory
in that fit place of your life.
Does that give you
the same reward
and make you not want the food?
Would it work?
Well, it's interesting.
In my book, there's a choice
of false fix or healthy fix.
LISA: OK.
-OK?
So my healthy fix is
that I'm a triathlete.
So I'm out there
doing my little thing.
And I keep pictures.
These are my cues.
LISA: Ah.
These are healthy cues.
LISA: Healthy case.
Exactly.
LISA: Very good.
So they're cues that
remind me, oh, my gosh.
And then, suddenly, I
remember how much fun it was
to hit the lake that morning,
and that bike ride was amazing,
and whatever.
All from one little cue that
happens to be my screen saver
on my computer that you saw.
-Brilliant.
DR. PEEKE: OK?
-Yeah.
DR. PEEKE: So healthy cues
are extremely important.
And what you're
asking also is that,
can I do battle with the false
fixes with my healthy fixes?
Can I take my
healthy cues and do
battle with the false fix cues?
[LAUGHTER]
My answer is absolutely yes.
But there's something
that has to happen.
And that is I have to have one
part of my brain beefed up,
strengthened, empowered to
be able to make that happen.
And that's the prefrontal
cortex of the brain,
right here, smack dab in here.
That's known as the brain's CEO.
Or what we say in food
and addiction research,
it's the brain's
braking mechanism.
So you'll be able
to say no when you
need to say no when
the prefrontal cortex
is really empowered and strong.
But I'm going to
tell you something.
When you're in full on,
out of control addiction,
whether it's food or
cocaine or whatever,
the prefrontal
cortex is damaged.
It's impaired--
LISA: Wow.
--so that you cannot
rein in impulsivity at all.
So when food people
say, well, gosh.
You know, come on.
It's just a cupcake.
-Mm.
It's just a piece of candy.
I mean, just use moderation.
Right?
Moderation is a moot point
when your prefrontal cortex
is impaired.
I'm sorry.
That's like walking
up to an alcoholic--
It doesn't work.
--you know, through-- and
he's already been through three
bottles of wine and
saying, just one glass,
that's all you really need.
You'll be fine.
LISA: So--
DR. PEEKE: Really?
-Mm.
DR. PEEKE: I don't think so.
So the more you have
the cupcakes and the more
that you fall to that
false fix, the more damage
you're doing to the
prefrontal cortex.
DR. PEEKE: That's correct.
So that it's
becoming completely
impaired for you to be able
to stop that in the future.
DR. PEEKE: That's
absolutely right.
Wow.
And I want to say something.
I used a cupcake on
my cover as an icon.
I mean, there were
plenty of people
out there who can be more
than happy to have one cupcake
and be perfectly-- you
know, walk away and not
feel out of control.
I only use it as an icon to
say that it could represent
any one of a bunch of
binge-able, cravable foods
that end up being false
fixes that lead you to feel
like you're out of
control and then decrease
the dopamine receptors and
lead you to that whole cascade
of changes, the
organic changes that
actually happen in your brain.
How did we get this way?
I mean, how did we get
this way as a nation?
We-- is it because there's
so many processed foods now,
more than ever before?
Well, here's what happened.
We sort of fell
into a land mine.
All right, Lisa, why
are we here today?
Why is it that you
and I can sit here
today and have this
marvelous conversation
and help other people?
Two things.
One, sex.
All right?
-OK.
-So we've been procreating.
Somebody's been procreating--
-To get us here.
--to get us here.
[LAUGHTER]
And you know, "Fifty
Shades of Gray"
aside, we're still sort
of doing it the same way,
you know, shackles optional.
All right, so that's
the sex part of it.
The food part of it is
where we really went awry.
Our brains were set
up for survival.
So sex and food, terribly
important for survival.
We are very attracted to fatty
foods because we have to.
Because fat gives us fuel.
And fuel helps us be able to get
through famine and tough times
when we can't score food.
It's all good.
We like sugary stuff,
but natural sugars.
So when raspberries are in
the bush or back and forth.
-Fruits.
-We love that.
Because if we weren't attracted
to it, we wouldn't eat it.
We'd starve to death.
So all of that's great.
But what happened was when we
started manufacturing food that
wasn't whole food-- it wasn't
the apples, the bananas,
and the rest of it.
Right?
When we started
manufacturing food,
we made it uber-palatable.
LISA: Mm.
We made it over-the-top
palatable so that, once again,
if you had that bowl of
fruit compared to the big,
gooey, you know,
strawberry tart, come on.
What are you gonna go for?
And so what ended
up happening was
our brains became conditioned
to this kind of food
so that this became the
real rewarding food,
and this was like blah.
It's like food
is a prescription.
It's like food is,
as you say, a drug.
It's pharmaceutical food.
Well, actually, you know,
Hippocrates was right.
"Let food be thy medicine."
LISA: Mm.
As it turns out, if it was
whole foods, it's natural.
LISA: Mm-hm.
It's going right into you
the way it's supposed to.
It's matching up with
your genes, et cetera.
But if you have these
hyperpalatables, most of these
are what I call
science fair projects.
LISA: Yep, science food.
Absolutely, the
whole foods is what
does not set up that addiction.
DR. PEEKE: That's correct.
Well, when's the last time
you met someone who said,
oh, my god, I just have to
do apples in the closet?
I mean, come on.
It just doesn't work that way.
I wish they were
addicted to apples.
But it doesn't work that well.
You know, honestly, I
mean, we had lunch together.
And you said, I want
my leafy greens.
I want my green food.
DR. PEEKE: That's right.
Because that's what's
gonna give you your energy.
DR. PEEKE: Absolutely.
You know that from a
scientific perspective.
Well, my genes are happy.
And you'll know more
about that soon.
So talk to me
about the experiment
that happened with the mice.
Well, now I've told
everybody that there
is food and addiction.
They're probably out there, you
know, wiping the little tears
from their eyes going,
oh, my gosh, what
am I gonna do about all this?
The good news is I never write
a book without a good ending.
[LAUGHTER]
And that means that
I have a solution,
which means even more new
science, which is so exciting.
It's called epigenetics.
Now, I'm gonna
explain what happened
with the birth of epigenetics
which, by the way,
only took place
in the year 2007.
-Great.
-All right.
So here's what happened.
Randy Jirtle, a scientist
at Duke University,
decided to take a strain of
mice called the Agouti mice.
Now, the Agouti mice,
the poor little things,
were basically bred to
be floppy, fat, yellow,
because the yellow color was
tied in with the activation
of their fat gene.
All right?
And then, what they did was they
decided to take the females,
and they decided to
just do one thing,
feed them something different.
Instead of the junk they usually
ate, feed them something that
gave them methyl
donors to shut down,
clamp down the gene that
was making them fat.
So they went ahead
and fed these mothers,
you know, leafy greens,
folate, a lot of B vitamins.
And lo and behold,
they had pups.
And everyone waited.
You know?
And they found out
that the pups, instead
of being floppy and yellow
and also destined to die young
from all kinds of diseases,
ended up being lean and brown,
meaning that simply
using leafy greens
shut down the Agouti gene,
which is the obesity gene.
And they were able
to breed completely
normal mice with no disease
that could live a long life.
Thus was the birth
of epigenetics,
which means that you have
control over gene expression,
no matter what your mother
and father gave you.
So this was done in one
generation with the mice?
DR. PEEKE: This was
done in one generation.
And it affected multiple
generations, proving
that DNA is not destiny.
LISA: Ah.
Your lifestyle choices are.
So what I want to find
out, though, is if we can
change this in our lifetime.
And we're gonna come back
to give you that answer.
We'll be right back with Dr.
Pam Peeke and "The Hunger Fix."
Welcome back.
I'm Lisa Garr.
You're watching
"Gaiam Inspirations."
And my guest is Dr. Pam Peeke.
We're talking about
"The Hunger Fix."
Before the break, we were
talking about the mice.
And if they actually
changed their diet,
they could change the
effects of their offspring.
But what about
during the lifetime
of that particular mouse?
Could they actually
change their body type
by changing their diet?
Well, one of the things we
found actually was even better.
We don't even have to
look at mice for this.
LISA: Right.
-We could look at humans.
LISA: Great.
And we could actually find that
people can take their genes.
Let's just say you had a gene
that gave you big time risk
for obesity, big time risk for
diabetes and heart disease,
for instance.
You can actually dampen
that down big time
by doing nothing more than just
some nutritional interventions,
very much like the mice.
It's extraordinary
how powerful this is.
But those genes can
be affected by that.
That's what epigenetics is.
"Epi" means "around the gene."
All right?
And "genetics" means
"gene," obviously.
And you've got these
little proteins
called histones that are just
hanging out around the gene.
And they watch what you do.
Oh, no.
She's gonna eat a Twinkie.
All right, so then
if you do that,
then they give-- they're like
a speechwriter for the gene.
They write a speech saying, oh,
boy, erode the immune system
and set up allergic
reactions all over her body.
Versus, oh, look.
She's gonna eat
an apple instead.
Then, we change the
script completely.
Say, oh, now empower
the immune system.
Give her the fantastic
phytonutrients
that come from that apple,
all the wonderful vitamins,
minerals, et cetera.
So the domino effect
comes from whatever
speech is being written.
So regardless of the gene
that you were born with,
you can actually modify it by
your own lifestyle choices,
meaning how you
think, how you eat,
and how you move your body.
I call it mind,
mouth, and muscle.
So you can actually up towards
a plate of very healthy food
and say to yourself, this
is going to feed my body
in everything that it needs.
And it actually does.
It actually does feed your body
in every way that it needs.
Well, yeah, but you
know what I do, Lisa.
It's even funnier.
You know, I don't
know if you heard
me say under my breath when we
were having our lunch together,
when I had all my nice,
leafy greens and my protein,
the [INAUDIBLE].
But as I looked at my food, I
said, oh, look, happy genes.
My genes are happy.
And I'm now speech writing great
things right now to the rest
of my body, versus if I
had a plate of nasty stuff,
you know, the
science fair projects
and the hyperpalatables,
in which case forget it.
I don't even want to know
what the speech writing
looked like on that one.
I was gonna say so you could
tell yourself, oh, this cupcake
is really good for me.
And it completely never
is going to be, right?
DR. PEEKE: But do
you know what it is?
It's the food-gene connection.
We finally have the
tools to measure
how this actually happens.
So what we have here
is we have a slide
that shows the difference
between the control
and the cocaine abuser.
DR. PEEKE: So the reason why we
have this slide is to show what
happens-- speaking of
food-- with glucose
metabolism in the brain.
And as you can see in
the cocaine abuser,
there's an area
up above, what we
call the orbitofrontal cortex.
And this is where a
lot of this reward
system and addiction action
takes place in the brain.
And in the normal
control, what you'll
see is tons and
tons of wonderful,
you know, activation when you
see something, for instance.
And it's all good.
Right?
But when you have
a cocaine abuser,
almost nothing's
happening up there
because the glucose metabolism
in that part of the brain
is eroded.
It's impaired after year
after year, day after day,
week after week, month
after month abuse.
Then, finally, you actually have
impaired ability of the brain
to take its own nutrients
from whatever you eat
and actually use it to
repair and function,
which is why
cocaine abusers have
issues with thinking,
cognitive abilities,
and all the rest of it.
And that's why it's
called the false fix.
DR. PEEKE: You got it.
And the same thing
we found is happening
in people with food addiction.
So that false fix, that
reaching for those chips, that
reaching for that food creates
that same exact chemical
reaction in the brain.
Well, it's an organic reaction.
It's an amazing thing.
But now, we have the
scans to prove it.
OK, so you mentioned the
solutions were these three M's.
What are they?
And go through them
a little bit deeper.
OK, mind, mouth, and muscle.
The first thing you want to
do-- what did I tell you before?
I said you're gonna
have to duel it out
in your brain with a
hijacked reward system
because those
hyperpalatables are holding
onto that reward system.
So you need to
reclaim your brain.
You can't do that
without having a very
strong prefrontal cortex.
LISA: Cortex.
How do you rebuild that?
DR. PEEKE: OK.
One of the first things
you do is you meditate.
Absolutely.
This is not earthy,
crunchy time.
This is not, you know,
some new age-y, you know,
newfangled idea.
Forget it.
This is solid, hard
core, credible science.
We took two different
forms of meditation that
are more structured,
transcendental meditation and
mindfulness-based meditation.
These are easy to study
because, again, they have
more of a structure to them.
And what we were able to find
using the same kind of scans,
the PET scans as well
as the functional MRIs,
is that when you do regular
meditation, not just sporadic,
but regular meditation,
you actually
activate the prefrontal cortex.
You could see activation
of that part of the brain.
You're also inducing
neurogenesis.
You're making more brain cells.
You're carving new
brain circuits,
pathways in the brain, so that
you will default to a better
place to say no when
you need to say no,
versus having an eroded and
impaired prefrontal cortex.
Meditation is extremely
powerful for this.
If you're not meditating now,
honey, you are so last year.
OK?
[LAUGHTER]
-OK.
-Come on.
Get with the program.
The nutrition part of this,
which is the mouth part
of this, is very important.
Clearly when you're eating
whole foods, clearly
when your genes are happy,
part of that domino effect
is neurogenesis.
You're building a bigger brain.
And you're building,
again, augmenting
that same kind of
circuitry that I just
talked about with meditation.
Now, here we go to muscle.
Bet you didn't
know, but if you're
doing regular
physical activity--
and I don't mean you have
to join the Olympic camp.
I mean walking on
a routine basis
and maybe adding a little
bit more intensity to it
when you can.
Right?
If you do that,
you're increasing
the size of your brain.
You're getting a bigger brain.
LISA: Mm.
At the same time--
are you ready for this?
Studies have shown
that if you were
born with the worst
obesity gene--
it's called the FTO gene.
-OK.
Born with a worse obesity gene.
And you thought, oh, no.
DNA is my destiny, and
I'm going to be obese.
Wrong.
By simply walking on a
routine, regular basis,
on a daily basis, you can
dampen down that gene by 40%.
Then, if you add the methyl
donors from what you're eating,
you dampen it down even further.
No, you do not have to be obese.
-Interesting.
Now, that's amazing.
So what do you feel about the
"calories out, calories in"
concept?
If you're saying that you can
actually override the reward
system of the brain by giving
it positive food with the mind,
with the exercise, and
with the meditation,
what do you think about
calories out, calories in?
Well, you see here,
the problem I have
with that is, what calories?
It doesn't tell you think about
the quality of the calories.
I could have two candy
bars for 600 calories,
or I could end up
having, you know,
two meals and a snack of
whole foods that are life
giving for 600 calories.
Which one are you going for?
So it doesn't speak to
the issue of quality.
I'm looking at quality here.
Because quality is what
your genes are asking for.
They're saying, come on, man.
I want to have, you know,
the right kind of speech
to be able to give to
the rest of the body.
And I can't speech write
something positive if you're
giving me trash to eat.
It won't work.
All right?
-Interesting.
Give me something compatible
with my genes and my body.
And that's why the whole foods
are literally healing foods.
-That--
-You know?
And they'll just get you
out of this whole food
addiction cycle.
Speaking of which, it's
detox and recovery.
"The Hunger Fix" is a book
that is a game changer.
The old fashioned
way was to simply,
you know, flip out a 1,200
calorie diet for everyone.
LISA: Here's your diet.
Right.
You know, forget it.
Uh-uh.
It's not happening anymore.
What we're doing now is
saying, wait a minute.
You have organic biochemical
changes in your brain.
You're gonna have to detox
off what we call your crack.
You know what your crack is.
For some people, it's
salty, starchy foods.
For other people,
it's, you know, tons
of bread with tons of butter.
LISA: Uh-huh.
For other people,
it's all sweets.
It doesn't matter what it is.
You know what your crack
is because you feel
out of control when you eat it.
All right?
So you take that,
and you eliminate it.
And what you then do
is you give yourself
incredibly wonderful,
healthy fixes in its place.
And what I did was I actually
teamed with a phenomenal group
of culinary nutritionists
who were able to sit down
and do battle with all of
the false fixes with the most
tasty, wonderful
recipes and food
plans so that you can get
through a gentle detox
over about four to six weeks
and then move onto Begin
a Recovery.
And in Begin a
Recovery, what you're
doing there is practicing,
practicing, practicing,
practicing, every day.
Mind, mouth, muscle.
Keep refining.
You will slip.
You will fall.
You will stand up.
You will dust off
your little behind.
You will keep going, and you
will achieve what you need to
in order to be able to move
into the final phase which
is Master Recovery.
And even if you're in Master
Recovery, it's circuitous.
You could come back if
you need to to detox
if something happens to you.
One of my patients ended
up with breast cancer.
And she had to, you
know, go through surgery,
all the rest of it.
Eating was a little funky.
She came back through it,
right back up to Master.
Mm.
You are so incredibly
motivating.
Can I just have you
in my living room?
I mean it.
[LAUGHTER]
No, the book is amazing because
it makes so much clear sense.
You use so much
science to validate
what you're talking about.
And then, it gives
recipes, which is the best.
But I have to ask you,
do you eliminate it
completely forever?
Can I never have my,
you know, my Americana
with vanilla again?
DR. PEEKE: Well, here's
what's interesting.
First, you have to
identify your crack.
OK?
Whatever it may be.
And some people, all they
have to do is see a drugstore.
It's a cue.
And inside are the
big bags of candy
that they used to
buy at the drugstore.
One of my patients, you
know, had this issue.
All right?
So for her, just being near
these big bags of candy
was a huge problem for
her for a very long time.
But you have to ask
yourself why would you want
to be exposed to crappy candy?
Why do you want
that again anyway?
So it's very different
than if you were asking me,
well, you know, I have some
issues with oatmeal raisin
cookies, and the next thing you
know, I'm eating 12 of them.
Can I ever have an oatmeal
raisin cookie again?
The question is
answered this way.
One, if you have
crossaddictions-- if you're
a smoker or have been,
alcoholic or you've had issues,
or it's strongly in your
family, drugs, whatever else,
the answer is probably no.
You probably should
not be re-exposed again
because you just have too strong
a vulnerability in that area.
If, however, none of that's
true, if you have a mild food
addiction that it's
under control now,
you've shed whatever weight
you need to, you already have
adopted all these other
habits, then ask yourself,
do I really need that food stuff
again and to revisit all this?
Most people would say no.
What about the emotional part
of it, where you're looking
for that food or
that fix because you
want to drown out some certain
emotion that's happening?
Well, then take 10
steps back, Lisa.
Stress management.
All right?
Why are you knee jerking
right back into a false fix?
There are many other things you
can do, lots of other things
you can do that are
healthier fixes.
LISA: And that goes
back to the drug
reward circuit in the brain.
-Absolutely.
Absolutely.
LISA: Which we have a slide of.
This is what it
looks like, right?
DR. PEEKE: And so once
again, what you're looking at
is you're looking at all of
the flooding of the dopamine
in people who have both, you
see a control, and the cocaine.
Tons and tons and
tons of that dopamine
just secreted all the way
through these receptors.
Eventually what happens is these
receptors are gonna decrease
in number because the
body cannot handle
the overwhelming amount of
dopamine that's showering
upon it in the brain.
And so when the brain gets
overflooded with the dopamine
and it gets into that place,
how do you get out of it?
I mean, when you're
in that state
of a complete out of control
binge, what do you do?
That's a very tough thing.
The first thing that is
really the main prerogative
is to prevent this
in the first place.
Because when you're
really on a bender,
that's a very
difficult thing to do.
You know, that's like telling--
that's like grabbing a bottle
out of the hand of an alcoholic
when they're really-- you know,
they've already had
their first two glasses.
That's very tough.
And I'll tell you
another reason why.
When you continuously re-expose
the body, the brain to whatever
substance it may be,
it craves more and more
at higher and higher levels.
So now, to stop it
is very difficult.
The whole issue with
"The Hunger Fix"
is to prevent this
in the first place,
to get you through that
detox and recovery,
and keep you vigilant for
the rest of your life.
Because you're right, Lisa.
You brought it up perfectly.
Look at us in America.
There's cues everywhere.
Yes.
Radio, print media.
LISA: Thousands of times a day.
Online.
LISA: Yes.
Everywhere.
What people say.
What people-- you
know, they may walk by.
You're sitting on an airplane.
They just brought a
whole bag of stuff
to eat on the airplane with
you, right next to you.
So you can't control the cues.
DR. PEEKE: You
can't control them.
They're going to
always be there.
DR. PEEKE: But you can control
your response to the cues.
And this is why having a very
buffed up prefrontal cortex
is where it's at.
That's why my motto in the book
is "big brain, small waist."
[LAUGHTER]
-I love that.
One of the other things
I loved about the book
is the fact that it's
not one solution.
It's a minute to
minute solution.
DR. PEEKE: Right.
-Can you explain that?
DR. PEEKE: Every 24
hours-- you know,
it's what you see in all
addiction treatment, per se.
And that is you
live for 24 hours.
You don't stress about what's
happening five years from now.
You live for 24 hours.
So you say to yourself, how can
I stop cavin' to the cravin'?
How do I stop that?
So you look at
every single hour.
How have I prepared?
Do I have my appropriate foods?
And my avoiding, as best I can,
the people, places, and things
that cue me and trigger me.
And you may have to change
up how and where you live
and work to make this happen.
LISA: Interesting.
You know what I mean?
I you're trying to get off
alcohol, working at a bar
is probably not the
place to be, right?
I was going to
ask you how do you
coach your patients into
getting off of this addiction,
this false fix?
I get them into detox.
You know, what I do is I
detox them immediately.
I have them just sit down, be
honest, tell their true truth.
What is your crack?
What is your food crack?
Whatever it may be, you go home.
You get it out of the house.
I mean, people actually
keep this around.
Oh, well, I'll just keep
the ice cream around,
just-- wink, wink-- in case.
Right?
Really?
No, get it out of the house.
If it's something that's a
binge-able, cravable false fix,
get it out.
It's not working for you.
Right?
I have to do this
with my own husband.
I have no problems
with ice cream.
He does.
In all the years
we've been together,
I've never been able to
keep ice cream in the house
because it's unsafe around him.
Now, he's athletic, in great
shape, and all the rest of it.
But you know, if that stuff's
around, he'll start obsessing.
It's a cue.
And so everyone
has a strange one.
And you'd never expect it.
Men and women equally
have this problem.
Oh, absolutely.
Absolutely.
I have this desire
for crunchy, salty.
That is my cue.
It's crunchy, salty.
And the minute it's in the
house, my husband eats it.
[LAUGHTER]
DR. PEEKE: There it goes.
There it goes.
Well, we all have
something different.
And he says don't
bring it in the house.
DR. PEEKE: Mm-hm.
And he's right.
DR. PEEKE: Absolutely.
So in terms of not putting
the foods in your house--
and of course, you can
control your own environment.
But the outside environments,
what happens when
there is an emotion attached?
So have a friend who sets up
their vacations on the fact
that you can go different
places in these areas
to go eat because in the
past, her family went there.
And it's a good feeling that
she associated with food.
DR. PEEKE: Well,
you know, again,
in each one of those places,
are there foods that she can eat
that are not
binge-able, cravables?
And she has to start connecting
action with consequence.
Do you always want
to feel rotten
after you've eaten something,
where you feel out of control
and you've overeaten and
now you're in a big mess?
Is that really what you want?
When someone's in the
moment and they're
really going through
an addictive feeling
and experience--
LISA: Pattern, mm-hm.
The last thing on their
mind is the consequence.
They want it now, yesterday.
Right?
And so what she has to do
is go to all those places
and maybe change up, you know,
something else on the menu.
Because if, again,
it's a problem,
it's not worth all this hassle.
So she can go to the place
if she can tolerate it.
But if the cues are too strong
and she caves each time,
guess what.
I think it's time to
change the location.
If you have strengthened
the prefrontal cortex
and if you've rebuilt
that up in your brain
and when you see those
old cues, does it
reverse the effects of all the
strengthening that you've done?
DR. PEEKE: You know?
Not at all.
If you've strengthened the
prefrontal cortex, then
what you're doing now-- and
this is one of the functions--
the executive functions
of the prefrontal cortex--
is it connects action
with consequence.
So you'll be saying to
yourself, it's not worth it.
It's not worth it.
LISA: Really?
Not worth it.
The answer is no.
LISA: Well, now, do you
recommend any specific types
of diets, like the raw
food diet over the gluten
free or anything like that?
No, no, not at all.
What I ask people to do
is experiment and find
out what works best for them.
There is no one
diet for everyone.
For instance, I'm a triathlete.
The last thing I'd
ever do is have someone
want to eat some of the foods
I eat when I know I'm gonna go
out and do a lot of training.
LISA: Right.
It'd be silly.
Doesn't make any sense.
You have your own thing.
You're a big time biker,
a master of the bike,
I might add.
[LAUGHTER]
I do love it, yes.
DR. PEEKE: And you know how
you have to feed yourself.
LISA: Yeah.
But look at someone
else who's maybe
nowhere near as physically
active as either of us.
They have to have a way of
eating that works for them.
What I will tell you is
it better be whole foods.
Whole foods.
So that's your main tip.
I have question
about will power.
When you say that willpower just
does not work, but isn't that
what the willpower-- the
prefrontal cortex of the brain
strengthened is?
Is willpower?
What's the difference?
DR. PEEKE: That's
the whole point.
Prefrontal cortex gives you the
discipline and the willpower
to be able to get through
whatever you need to do, just
power through, whether it's
a deadline you're writing
or whatever it may be.
Right?
But if your reward
system is hijacked
by the hyperpalatables,
then the prefrontal cortex
is grossly impaired.
And it can't do that.
So that's why, when you're faced
with all these hyperpalatables
and let's say you're
already starting
to dig in, or back and forth,
willpower is a moot point.
It's right there
with moderation.
Forget it.
It's not going to happen.
You must have a strong
prefrontal cortex
to be able to face up
and to make battle with,
do battle with, you know,
these hyperpalatables.
And it takes practice over time.
Lots of physical activity
on a routine basis.
Lots of whole foods.
Lots of meditation.
Meditation.
Put them all
together-- mind, mouth,
muscle-- and you're armed,
locked, loaded, and dangerous.
Well, it makes a lot of sense.
You also mentioned that
there's three stages that come
along with "The Hunger Fix."
DR. PEEKE: Right.
Can you talk about those?
Again, we start
with detox always.
Identify your crack.
And then, you want
to be able to start
substituting the healthy
fixes for the false fixes
immediately.
That's where this wonderful
food comes in place.
The food plans, the recipes
are meant specifically
to fool the brain into thinking
you're having a hyperpalatable,
but you're not.
So there will be some
sweetness involved,
but it's not refined sugar.
All right?
LISA: OK.
It'll come from
natural sources.
You'll have healthy fats to eat.
You'll have healthy
carbohydrates
to be able to eat.
Right?
And it'll be
terribly satisfying.
The protein especially is
exquisitely satisfying.
You can do this all
the time so long as you
stay consistent with that.
The minute you
re-expose yourself
to one of the hyperpalatables
that got you going
in the first place, you know,
you just back tread, you know,
28 steps.
You got to start
this all over again.
Now, you get through four
to six weeks of this--
because science has shown it
takes about four to six weeks
to acclimate the brain, get
those neural circuits starting
to be developed in your brain.
And then, you go right
into Begin a Recovery.
Begin a Recovery is
where you practice
and practice and practice.
And this is where you
take mind, mouth, muscle,
and you refine and hone
every single skill in there.
And it takes a long time.
I mean, this isn't
an overnight thing.
Those silly ads that show
you overnight success--
LISA: Lose 10 pounds, yeah.
Come on.
The bottom line is sure,
anybody can drop weight.
Anybody could drop 10 pounds.
The real success is keeping
it off for a lifetime.
And the only way to do that is
in a healthy way where you're
building strong foundations
to be able to sustain
this for a lifetime.
So that's why I love it.
And then, Master Recovery
is the highest level.
And Mastery is
simply the practice
and practice and
practice again, but now
at a much, much higher level.
So what you're saying is
the most important thing
is awareness of understanding
this chemical reaction
in the brain that you're
in an addictive pattern,
much like a drug addict.
DR. PEEKE: Right.
When you start to go off your--
DR. PEEKE: Organic changes.
Your false fixes.
And that awareness
enables you to stop
reaching for the false
fixes and to slowly,
one moment at a time, one
meal at a time, you know,
one healthy fix at a time, to
rebuild the prefrontal cortex
so that you have a
stronger base from which
to say no to those false fixes.
DR. PEEKE: Absolutely.
Absolutely.
And you know the nice thing
about this whole thing?
A stronger prefrontal
cortex helps you
in every single
aspect of your life.
Because it also helps
you be creative.
It helps you--
LISA: Make better decisions.
Absolutely.
Organize, strategize, think
about your life, go deep.
So you see you
get a huge win-win
out of this entire thing.
Go after your purpose in life.
Absolutely.
Find--
Your hunger in life.
Your--
What you're really hungry for.
So is it true
that if you really
do take this on and
really change the way
that you're eating, your eating
patterns, that it could last
for a lifetime?
Not only that, though.
If you're someone who's
going to have children,
you will gift your children
with a brand new epigenome, one
that you carefully
honed and carved,
that will be transmitted to
them through your own epigenome,
through your own genetics.
So that they'll be
born gifted and already
equipped to be able to deal
with what goes on in the brain.
That is an extraordinary gift.
Of course, it goes
the other way, too.
If you're not minding
what's going on
and if your epigenome is
showing-- it's reflecting
that you've been eating trash
and that you're not exercising,
you're not
meditating, not eating
whole foods, and
the rest of it, that
also is passed onto children.
And we're already
seeing in our studies
what happens in both scenarios.
I'm kind of voting for
the healthier scenario.
Well, let's talk about
children if we can.
DR. PEEKE: Of course.
And let's talk to parents.
And what advice could
you give the parents
for a child that is obese?
Now, they got that way by
eating these false fixes.
How do you recondition
the child's mind?
You recondition the child's
mind by reconditioning
the parent's mind.
LISA: I know.
I'm sorry, but this
is a family affair.
You cannot leperize
a child and say,
OK, well, there's
something wrong with you.
Really?
Well, they're
living in your home,
and you're buying the groceries.
Now, wait a minute.
This is not a blame game.
This is a share game.
LISA: What about school?
What about pizza?
What about--
DR. PEEKE: No, but
it's everywhere.
It's everywhere.
It's in cafeterias.
But it's everywhere.
So that a parent may do
the best they can at home.
But then, the child
goes into an environment
that's basically a war
zone, filled with land mines
everywhere.
LISA: Yes.
The best thing you could
possibly do is try to teach
that child how to
be able to discern
what's good and what isn't.
You know, kids can do this.
They're smart.
They're little smarty pants.
LISA: They know what's healthy.
And you know what you do?
You get them involved
in growing gardens.
Kids decrease the
amount of trash
they eat when they grow
their own garden because they
make the connection.
They get it.
And they have great pride
when they grew that, you know,
watermelon.
And they are gonna
be able to eat it
and share it with other people.
Get them involved with the
entire cooking process.
Get them involved
with food preparation,
with food-- grocery
shopping, for instance.
Whole food preparation.
Get it going.
Make them part of
the entire cycle.
Right now, today's children
are so disassociated from all
of that entire world of food
preparation, development,
growing, the rest of it.
Bring them back in again.
And that means that the
parents have to be engaged.
And if the parents
aren't engaged,
the children will follow suit.
Well, that is
actually a great tip
is to get the children
involved in growing food
and in making the food
in the kitchen as well.
And when they get out
into the world-- I mean,
I have a gluten free lifestyle
and so does my daughter.
When she gets to
school, it's sandwiches,
pizza, breaded chicken.
It's everything that's--
DR. PEEKE: I know.
You know, so she has
to, at a young age,
learn self discipline.
But at the same
time, I don't want
to give her a complex about it.
I don't want to give her--
DR. PEEKE: No.
--an eating disorder by
having her focus too much on it.
You know something?
Your problem and your challenge
is shared by so many parents
out there.
-Yes.
And my heart goes
out to all of you
because this is so much
harder than when we grew up.
When I grew up, I mean, my snack
after I came home from school
were graham crackers and fruit.
It was sort of simple.
Now, you know, it's like a whole
panoply of hyperpalatables.
And the poor kids don't
know which way is up.
And they think it's cool to
have the hyperpalatables.
We have to sit down.
And we've got to,
in a loving way,
not in food policing at
all, but in a loving way,
teach them by
mentoring ourselves,
by being good role
models, and engaging them,
participating in
the entire thing.
Because if we don't, we're going
to be raising full generations
of people, boys,
girls, men and women,
teens who are addicted to food.
Thank you, again.
Your information is valuable,
absolutely essential
for our nation.
And if you would like to
watch a replay of my interview
with Dr. Pam Peeke or
share it with your friends,
go to GaiamTV.com.
There's a lot more thought
provoking interviews there
as well and inspirational films.
So for a free trial, go
to GaiamTV.com today.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.
[MUSIC PLAYING]